Judgment
1FULLERTON J:  JP died on 1 April 2011 from a head injury she sustained on 30 March 2011 whilst she was in the sole care of the accused at his home in Coffs Harbour.  The accused lived alone.  The child was aged 2½ at the time of her death.  The accused was not related to the child but had an established relationship with her as a de facto grandparent. 
2The head injury comprised a linear fracture at the base of the skull with associated bilateral subdural haemorrhages and brain swelling.  Bilateral multi-layered retinal hemorrhages were also identified. 
3On 1 August 2011, at the culmination of the police investigation into the child's death, the accused was charged with her murder.
4On 8 October 2013 the accused was arraigned before me and entered a plea of not guilty.  The trial was conducted without a jury in accordance with s 132 of the Criminal Procedure Act 1986. 
5The trial commenced in Coffs Harbour where evidence was called from thirteen witnesses, inclusive of the child's mother (BJP), grandmother (RW) and great grandmother (LP).  These witnesses gave evidence of seeing the child in the days, weeks and months preceding her death while she was both in the sole care of her mother and, after her mother had placed the child in the care of the accused, in his sole care.  Paul Harmey, the ambulance officer who transported the child from the accused's home to Coffs Harbour Hospital on 30 March, and Dr Robertson, who treated her on admission before she was conveyed to Westmead Hospital that night where she later died, also gave evidence in Coffs Harbour.  They both noted bruising to the child's forehead unrelated to what later proved to be the fatal head injury.  Additional sites of bruising, both to the forehead and other areas of the child's body, were identified when the child was examined by Dr Norrie at the Children's Hospital at Westmead on 31 March 2011.  Save only for the bruising to the child's right ear, all areas of secondary bruising were confirmed on autopsy.  The autopsy also identified additional extensive bruising to the scalp, not associated with the skull fracture.  (These injuries were referred to at trial collectively as ""the secondary injuries"".)  
6The trial resumed in Sydney on 21 October 2013 where evidence was called by both the Crown and the accused from a number of expert witnesses in forensic medicine, paediatrics and biomechanical engineering.  
7The accused did not give evidence.  He relied upon two electronically recorded interviews with police in which he claimed that the child's head injury must have been sustained when she fell from her pram while he was in the toilet.  He also relied upon a walkthrough interview at his home where he reconstructed the scene of the accident.  He denied deliberately inflicting any of the secondary injuries or seeing anyone else injuring the child. 
The Crown case in summary
8In order to convict the accused of murder I must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that it was the deliberate act of the accused which caused the death of the child, and that the act was accompanied by an intention to kill or to inflict grievous bodily harm.  In this case, the Crown alleged that the fatal head injury was deliberately inflicted by the accused, and that the location of the skull fracture and the complex of associated head injuries are such that I would be satisfied, beyond reasonable doubt, that at the time of the assault the accused intended to kill the child or to inflict grievous bodily harm.  
9The Crown is unable to appoint the precise mechanism which caused the fatal head injury.  The results of autopsy do not discriminate between the skull fracture being the result of a direct blow to the back of the head by the accused's fist or by an object wielded by him, or as a result of the child being thrown or deliberately dropped from some height, with the back of her head striking a hard surface and fracturing in the process.  In addition, the Crown cannot appoint the location in the accused's home where the child was fatally assaulted.  A crime scene search warrant executed on 31 March 2011 did not produce any relevant scientific evidence.  
10On the Crown case, the time at which the fatal injury was inflicted is able to be appointed with reasonable certainty.  At 10.01am the child was seen in the accused's care in a local chemist sitting upright in her pram and capable of responsive movement and, within a minute or so of 10.21am, she was seen by her mother and her mother's boyfriend in a severely compromised state of orientation and consciousness lying on the couch in the accused's living room after they arrived in response to the accused's telephone call claiming that there had been an accident.  The expert medical witnesses all agreed that whatever might have been the explanation for the child being observed by a pharmacy assistant to be sad and perhaps unwell in the chemist at 10.01am, she could not at that time have sustained the skull fracture, or any of the associated intracranial bleeding first revealed on the CT scan performed at Coffs Harbour Hospital following her admission two hours later.
11It was the Crown case that after returning from the chemist at about 10.10am the accused assaulted the child with sufficient force to fracture her skull and render her unconscious or semi-conscious.  It was also the Crown case that before he telephoned the child's mother at 10.21am the accused deliberately positioned the pram on its side, near the tiled foyer of his home unit, to give the pretence of the scene of an accident, and that he reconstructed that same scene in the course of a walkthrough with police conducted on 2 April 2011 for the same reason.  
12The Crown submitted that the postulated but unwitnessed fall from the pram was false and demonstrably so.  The Crown also submitted that the accused gave a deliberately false account to police of his movements on the morning of 30 March 2011 when he was first interviewed on 1 April 2011, an account which he repeated in the walkthrough on 2 April 2011 and in a further recorded interview on 3 April 2011.  According to the Crown, the falsity of that account was exemplified by the fact that the accused made no reference to leaving the house on the morning of 30 March to collect a prescription for anti-anxiety medication from the chemist, or that he had telephoned his doctor at 9.46am asking for the medication as a matter of urgency because, as he claimed to his doctor, ""Something terrible [had] happened"".  Instead, the accused consistently asserted in his various interviews with police that the morning of 30 March was a ""routine"" morning at home with the child until she fell from the pram.  The Crown submitted that the accused's lies were motivated by a consciousness of guilt, there being no other reasonable explanation for his failure to give a complete and honest account of his movements on the morning of 30 March in the course of what he knew was a police investigation into the child's death.  
13The Crown submitted that the accused's account of an accidental fall from the pram is not only inherently implausible but the time at which he claimed the accident occurred (namely, while the child's preferred television programs were screening - a claim repeatedly detailed and described by him to police) has been shown by the evidence led at trial to be objectively false.  The timetable of televised children's programs, variously nominated by the accused as being those the child was watching immediately before the fall, were all screened between 8.15am and 9.23am - before the child left the house with the accused to go to the chemist.  
14The Crown also relied upon the multiple sites of secondary bruising to various parts of the child's body in further support of the Crown case that the fatal head injury was not an accidental injury but an inflicted injury.  These secondary areas of bruising included extensive bruising to the scalp (revealed when the scalp was reflected at autopsy) with maximal involvement of large areas of the forehead anteriorly and the posterior aspect on the left side of the head; bilateral bruising to the ears; bruising to both buttocks (predominantly involving the left buttock with the grouping of the bruises resembling a handprint) and an area of bruising on the left thigh posteriorly (either incorporated as part of the handprint or a separate site of trauma) which, on dissection revealed bruising passing through the fat to the level of the musculature.  
15On the Crown case none of the secondary injuries were consistent with, or might reasonably be viewed as being consistent with, the postulated fall from the pram.  Viewed as a constellation of injuries, the Crown submitted that they could not be explained by any other accidental cause.  The Crown relied upon the evidence from the child's mother and her boyfriend (LB), and to a lesser extent the child's grandmother and great grandmother, to the effect that in the days preceding 30 March the child was not unwell and they saw no other bruises or signs of injury other than a bruise to her left temple from knocking into a hall table and a small bruise to her thigh.  It was the Crown case that the bruising to the child's ears; the extensive bruising to her forehead; the patterned bruising to her buttocks and the deep and diffuse bruising to her thigh were also deliberately inflicted by the accused, some of which may have been inflicted in the course of the fatal assault but all of which were inflicted some time after 5pm on 29 March when she was last seen by her mother and her mother's boyfriend in good health and spirits at the accused's home. 
The accused's case in summary   
16The accused denied deliberately harming the child in any way.  So far as the child's head injury was concerned, it was his case at trial, consistent with his account to police, that the child must have climbed, or attempted to climb into or onto her pram and, in the process, fallen backwards, striking the back of her head on the tiled floor in the front foyer of his home.  The accused told police that he did not see the fall but he heard a crashing sound while he was in the toilet and, upon rushing out, found the child lying on her back on the tiles.  He said he picked her up and carried her to the couch in a semi-conscious state and immediately telephoned her mother. 
17It was the accused's case, again consistent with what he told police, that the child had bruised her forehead in the left temple area when she ran into a small hall table some days before 30 March (an event he said was witnessed by the child's mother and which she confirmed in her evidence) and, on another occasion, that she had stumbled over or fallen upon some toys which may have explained the bruise on her thigh.  He said that there were areas of redness in her ears from insect bites.  He also told police that the child had left his home in the company of her mother and LB for two hours on the afternoon of 29 March and that when she returned she was quiet and seemed unwell.  He said he saw an area of redness on her right thigh when he changed her for bed that night.  
18In so far as the Crown relied upon the secondary injuries to reinforce the Crown case that the fatal injury was not accidental but inflicted, Ms Yehia, senior counsel for the accused, submitted that the Crown has not excluded the reasonable possibility that at least some of the secondary injuries were capable of being explained by accidental causes and, for that reason, I would discount those sites of injury as having any bearing on the issues at trial.  She also submitted that of the secondary injuries that were not readily or reasonably explained as the result of accident, (in particular the bilateral bruising to the ears and the deep patterned bruising to the buttocks) there remained a real and pervasive doubt as to the identity of the person or people who inflicted them.  In that connection, she submitted that I would reject as untrue aspects of the evidence of the child's mother and her boyfriend, in particular, their evidence that they did not have the child in their sole care and custody for some hours on the afternoon of 29 March as the accused claimed in his interview with police.  She submitted that the evidence of the child's mother generally lacked weight and that I would be left with concerns as to her credit.  Ms Yehia submitted that the delay of over an hour before the child's mother called the ambulance when, on any view, it was obvious that her daughter was seriously ill, coupled with a series of unexplained phone calls to her mother within that hour, is consistent with a desire on her part to conceal the child's inflicted injuries from the authorities, perhaps in the hope that the head injury, which she believed to have been the result of the fall, was not serious.
19Ms Yehia relied upon the proven tendency of the child's mother to inflict serious violence on her own invalid mother, as tending to prove her violent disposition when triggered by stressors of various kinds.  She also submitted that the personal circumstances of the child's mother in the weeks preceding the child's death (including leaving her in the care of the accused for three weeks in order to cement a relationship with a new boyfriend with a view to moving to Brisbane to live with him) raised a real doubt as to the identity of the person who inflicted the secondary injuries, thereby undermining the Crown case that it was the accused who inflicted the fatal injury.  
A summary of the competing submissions on the question whether a short distance fall can account for the fatal injury
20The Crown submitted the combined weight of the medical evidence as to the severity of the head injury, including the site of the skull fracture in the occiput, to the effect that it was unlikely to have been occasioned in a short distance fall; the identification of bilateral retinal haemorrhages; the design and dimension of the pram; the height of the child and the location of the pram relative to where the accused claimed to police he found the child on the tiles in the foyer, combine to exclude the reasonable possibility that the child died as the result of an accident.  
21Ultimately, the Crown submitted that with the reasonable possibility of accident discounted and, in the absence of any other reasonable hypothesis for the child having suffered the fatal injury consistent with the innocence of the accused, I would return a verdict of guilty.
22Ms Yehia submitted that not only was the postulated fall from the child's pram capable of producing a head injury of the kind revealed at post-mortem from a biomechanical perspective as attested to by Professor Pandy, but that each of the three expert medical witnesses called by the Crown, Drs Norrie, Duflou and Moran, conceded that it was possible that the fatal head injury was sustained in a short distance fall of the postulated kind, albeit that it was unlikely.  Ms Yehia acknowledged that a fatal head injury resulting from a child falling a short distance was reported in the literature as a rare occurrence.  She also acknowledged that the epidemiological studies referred to extensively in the literature, and drawn upon by each of the medical witnesses as contributing to the opinions they expressed that an accidental fall was a possible but unlikely cause of this child's death, was an approach reasonably open to them as experts in their field.  She submitted however, that after reviewing all the evidence (including the accused's account to police and his demonstrated love and affection for the child, as attested to by all members of the child's family), I would be compelled to the conclusion that an accidental fall of the kind postulated is a reasonably possible explanation for this child's death and one that the Crown cannot discount beyond reasonable doubt.  For that reason, she submitted I would return a verdict of not guilty.  
23Ms Yehia submitted that the accused's account of the incident, given for the first time within minutes of the child being injured, and maintained thereafter in the course of sustained questioning over many days, was coherent and consistent.  Save only for failing to account for his visit to the chemist in his account of the morning of 30 March, Ms Yehia submitted that there was nothing in the accused's demeanour in the face of police questioning or the answers he provided which gave any support to the Crown case.  In so far as concerned the lies relied upon by the Crown, Ms Yehia submitted that I would not be satisfied that the only explanation for his failing to tell police that he had called his doctor and had left the house to go to the chemist was because he knew he had killed the child and needed to conceal that fact, and that I could not rely upon that lie (or those lies) to infer guilt in those circumstances (see Edwards v R [1993] HCA 63; 178 CLR 193 at 201).
24Ms Yehia submitted that the Crown case, which timed the fatal assault at some time between approximately 10.10am and 10.21am (allowing about ten minutes for the accused to return to his home from the chemist), simply could not, in any rational way, account for the accused being seen at 10.01am in the chemist with the child and the relative normalcy of that encounter.  She submitted that it defies commonsense that the accused would have inflicted some non-fatal, but nonetheless serious injuries to the child that morning sufficient to raise his anxiety levels to the extent that he was prompted to call his doctor at 9.46am for an urgent issue of a prescription for anti-anxiety medication (the explanation advanced by the Crown for his call to the doctor), and then to have taken the injured child with him to the chemist to collect the medication, with the obvious risk of her vocally complaining that the accused had hit her and hurt her, or that her injuries would be noticed and the subject of remark or inquiry.  She also submitted that attaching the raincover to the pram (the evidence at trial being that the weather that morning was very cloudy with showers) was entirely consistent with the overwhelming weight of the otherwise uncontradicted evidence to the effect that the accused was a responsible and loving carer, and wholly inconsistent with him having assaulted the child before going to the chemist, sufficient to cause the secondary injuries, and then fatally assaulting her within minutes of his return.
25Ms Yehia further submitted that the Crown could point to nothing in what others observed of the accused's treatment of the child whilst she was in his care in the days immediately preceding 30 March, or on other occasions over the three weeks before that day, that might shed any light on what might have caused him to assault the child, inflicting multiple injuries to her head (one fatal), and to her torso and limbs in what the medical evidence suggested must have been at least two episodes of serious and unrestrained violence.  
26Ms Yehia submitted that the accused's demonstrated love and concern for the child was confirmed by the candid and recorded interactions with the child on his mobile phone which were exhibited at the trial.  This, she submitted, in itself raises a doubt as to whether the Crown has proved its case of murder.  She submitted that the Crown's description of the accused in final submissions as a man under financial, physical and emotional pressure, such as to render him capable of explosive and episodic violence on 30 March, was without any evidentiary foundation and was nothing more than a strained attempt by the Crown to explain the inexplicable and I would not be persuaded of the Crown's submission for that reason.  She submitted that when the accused's proven demeanour and behaviour is coupled with an accidental fall being a possible explanation for the fatal injury, the Crown has failed to discharge the onus of proving the accused's guilt beyond reasonable doubt and he should be acquitted. 
The issues raised by the evidence 
27The evidence led at trial over thirteen hearing days was detailed and in parts both complex and perturbing.  That said, a number of issues ultimately crystallised as critical to the question whether the Crown had proved the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt.  They included the following:
