    It is easy to understand the terrifying effect of a 
campaign of telephone calls at night by a silent caller to a woman living on her 
own. It would be natural for the victim to regard the calls as menacing. What 
may heighten her fear is that she will not know what the caller may do next. The 
spectre of the caller arriving at her doorstep bent on inflicting personal 
violence on her may come to dominate her thinking. After all, as a matter of 
common sense, what else would she be terrified about? The victim may suffer 
psychiatric illness such as anxiety neurosis or acute depression. Harassment of 
women by repeated silent telephone calls, accompanied on occasions by heavy 
breathing, is apparently a significant social problem. That the criminal law 
should be able to deal with this problem, and so far as is practicable, afford 
effective protection to victims is self evident. 


    From the point of view, however, of the general 
policy of our law towards the imposition of criminal responsibility, three 
specific features of the problem must be faced squarely. First, the medium used 
by the caller is the telephone: arguably it differs qualitatively from a 
face-to-face offer of violence to a sufficient extent to make a difference. 
Secondly, ex hypothesi the caller remains silent: arguably a caller may avoid 
the reach of the criminal law by remaining silent however menacing the context 
may be. Thirdly, it is arguable that the criminal law does not take into account 
""mere"" psychiatric illnesses. 


    At first glance it may seem that the legislature has 
satisfactorily dealt with such objections by section 43(1) of the 
Telecommunications Act 1984 which makes it an offence persistently to make use 
of a public telecommunications system for the purpose of causing annoyance, 
inconvenience or needless anxiety to another. The maximum custodial penalty is 
six months imprisonment. This penalty may be inadequate to reflect a culpability 
of a persistent offender who causes serious psychiatric illness to another. For 
the future there will be for consideration the provisions of sections 1 and 2 of 
the Protection from the Harassment Act 1997, not yet in force, which creates the 
offence of pursuing a course of conduct which amounts to harassment of another 
and which he knows or ought to know amounts to harassment of the other. The 
maximum custodial penalty is six months imprisonment. This penalty may also be 
inadequate to deal with persistent offenders who cause serious psychiatric 
injury to victims. Section 4(1) of the Act of 1997 which creates the offence of 
putting people in fear of violence seems more appropriate. It provides for 
maximum custodial penalty upon conviction on indictment of five years 
imprisonment. On the other hand, section 4 only applies when as a result of a 
course of conduct the victim has cause to fear, on at least two occasions, that 
violence 
will
 be used against her. It may be difficult to secure a 
conviction in respect of a silent caller: the victim in such cases may have 
cause to fear that violence 
may
 be used against her but no more. In my 
view, therefore, the provisions of these two statutes are not ideally suited to 
deal with the significant problem which I have described. One must therefore 
look elsewhere. 


    It is to the provisions of the Offences against the 
Person Act 1861 that one must turn to examine whether our law provides effective 
criminal sanctions for this type of case. In descending order of seriousness the 
familiar trilogy of sections (as amended) provide as follows: 


 ""18. Whosoever shall unlawfully and maliciously by any means 
  whatsoever . . . cause any grievous bodily harm to any person . . . with 
  intent . . . to do some grievous bodily harm to any person, . . . shall be 
  guilty of felony and being convicted thereof shall be liable . . . to 
  [imprisonment] for life . . . . 


 ""20. Whosoever shall unlawfully and maliciously . . . inflict 
  any grievous bodily harm upon any other person, either with or without any 
  weapon or instrument, shall be guilt of a misdemeanour, and being convicted 
  therefore shall be liable [to imprisonment . . . for not more than five 
  years.] 


 ""47. Whosoever shall be convicted upon an indictment of any 
  assault occasioning actual bodily harm shall be liable . . . [to imprisonment 
  for not more than five years]."" 
Making due allowance for the incongruities in these provisions, the sections 
can be described as ""a ladder of offences graded in terms of relative 
seriousness"": 
Ashworth
, 
Principles of Criminal Law
, 2nd ed. 
(1995), at p. 313. An ingredient of each of the offences is ""bodily harm"" to a 
person. In respect of each section the threshold question is therefore whether a 
psychiatric illness, as testified to by a psychiatrist, can amount to ""bodily 
harm."" If the answer to this question is no, it will follow that the Act of 1861 
cannot be used to prosecute in the class of cases which I have described. On the 
other hand, if the answer to the question is yes, it will be necessary to 
consider whether the persistent silent caller, who terrifies his victim and 
causes her to suffer a psychiatric illness, can be criminally liable under any 
of these sections. Given that the caller uses the medium of the telephone and 
silence to terrify his victim, is he beyond the reach of these sections? 


    Similar problems arise in the case of the so called 
stalker, who pursues a campaign of harassment by more diffuse means. He may 
intend to terrify the woman and succeed in doing so, by relentlessly following 
her, by unnecessarily appearing at her home and place of work, photographing 
her, and so forth. Is he beyond the reach of the trilogy of sections in the Act 
of 1861? 


The two appeals before the House
 


    There are two appeals before the House. In 

Ireland
 the appellant was convicted on his plea of guilty of three 